---
layout: ../../../layouts/MarkdownPostLayout.astro
title: 'Much Ado About Nothing on Rainy Days'
pubDate: '2025-05-20'
description: Rainy days and the romanticization of idleness.
author: 'Florence Yuan'
image:
    url: 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/17/Gustave_Caillebotte_-_Paris_Street%3B_Rainy_Day_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg/1014px-Gustave_Caillebotte_-_Paris_Street%3B_Rainy_Day_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg'
    altText: 'Dripping rain in front of dark, lush trees'
    creator: Gustave Caillebotte
    embedUrl: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gustave_Caillebotte_-_Paris_Street;_Rainy_Day_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg
    domain: 'Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons'

tags: ["personal", "blogging", "philosophy", "rainy days"]
---

There seems to be much romance attached to rainy days. Hot days, not so much; but rain appears to inspire, at least in some of us, a liking that goes decidedly contrary to the well-honed modern day pragmatism. In books, in movies, in idle daydreams, there is nothing so charming as a spring drizzle when there is nothing to be done in the cafe or the apartment, and all the world could weep for the warm insulation of the roof and that gentle superiority of the person within, who sits at his desk nursing a cup of coffee and surveys his rain-splashed window with mild contentment.

Is this person very irritating? Yes, oh yes - to us plebeians who huddle under umbrellas in the vain hope that they will shield us from the wrath of god, poor little umbrellas making angry arcs of red and green that shudder impotently in the great moving mass of the morning herd.  Oh, the interminable cold gray sludge that pours from the heavens!  Oh, the despicable little man who sits behind that lighted window up high, his entire demeanor represented by the smug, opaque gleam of gold-rimmed spectacles!

But then the little man twinkles - he _glows_, for a second - he flickers between the layers of consciousness, the enigmatic light that hovers in porous sheets of glass... He is no longer there - he is a fairytale! He is I, and I am He, and after all I have been daydreaming as He and He has been dreaming as I, and the great streams of traffic have long since disappeared for him into other streams, into other worlds...

Just a couple of weeks ago, I was vacationing at a mountain resort in southern China. There was nothing about the mountains that could be called spectacular - in height they were lacking, and in terms of the stone formations they were not peculiarly striking. The moment I stepped off the bus, it was the air that arrested me - or more precisely, the atmosphere. It was like a thin sheet of mist had flown from the folds of my cloak and into a great, shapeless mass of humidity, drawing portentous veils all over the flat, low roofs of the buildings that huddled humbly beneath the underbelly of the sky. Not much of the mountains could be seen - they were all enveloped in the heavy fog. But what could be seen were like wet flecks of color, gleaming behind the moist, taffeta-like clouds with a sly elusion that used to delight the poets.

All the hotels in the area - and there were many - had such deliciously poetic names. They spoke of mysterious lanes, bamboo forests, and gentle harmonies between mountain and water. Their drainage systems weren't particularly good, and my landlady informed us that the dining areas in the basements had been flooded in years before. Apparently there was nothing terrible about it. The water invited itself, and there was something fitting, too, in the unity of the names and the great white, roaring river that passed from the foot of the mountains to within a few feet of the hotels - the whole earth sighed in anticipation of rain, and between the floating tables and the drenched visitors the landlady could not help but laugh; a startled sound, nothing malicious in it.

When I was younger, I used to detest rain, for it made everything terribly wet and unwieldy. In my mind it was perpetually associated with out-of-order WCs, closed-off playgrounds, and hair and socks dripping with water. It was as I grew older that I understood the charm of rainy days, just as I (and so many others) grew to appreciate coffee, cats, and thunderstorms. I wonder sometimes if this is evidence of a glorified apathy - one that we associate charmingly with intellectual pursuits, but really typifies the proverbial individual in the ivory tower, whose world is small and elegant and insular, shielding him from the uglier things in life and thus enabling him to write poetry, to revel in dreary, overcast days, and to have the luxury of exalting unpleasant things in the name of aesthetic contemplation.

In all the great 18th and 19th century novels, it is only the wealthy and the leisurely who ponder such trivialities, and those leisurely persons who happen not to be wealthy are portrayed with much derision - who can forget Mrs. Bennet's insistence on her daughter braving rain, or that shameless sponger and dilettante, Harold Skimpole, whose childlike enthusiasm and artistic talents are as scarce as his moral character?  I think I am sufficiently at leisure to declare a love for art, but not quite sufficiently learned to comment on it. To make a living, to generate a semblance of respectability, we must work, work, work. On the other hand, leisure, and the many hours that come with it, may just be the greatest modern day luxury.

All in all, I think there is no real escape from the ugly, the material, the insular. Everywhere we go we must find them. To work is to be partially assimilated into their principles. So if we should have leisure, if we can afford to take some hours of the day simply looking at art, or listening to rain, or writing nonsense that will never see the light of the day, I'm of the opinion that we should take the opportunity and roll with it. Still I would not quite laugh as my landlady at the hotel did, I think - it speaks of a lack of sympathy, and if nothing else, rain is sympathetic. It touches on the little things in life to make them flourish.