---
layout: ../../../layouts/MarkdownPostLayout.astro
title: 'Thoughts on Distractions'
pubDate: '2025-07-10'
description: 'Many have declared distractions to be the bane of not only productivity, but also equality. But have we been overlooking the great majority of distractions in favor of the few? Note: this essay is just some personal reflections on distractions, and how social attitudes have impaired our intellectual lives.'
author: 'Florence Yuan'
image:
    url: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/84/Johann_Georg_Meyer_-_Young_Woman_Looking_through_a_Window_-_1981.497_-_Museum_of_Fine_Arts.jpg
    altText: 'A young woman looking through a window'
    creator: Johann Georg Meyer
    embedUrl: 'https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Johann_Georg_Meyer_-_Young_Woman_Looking_through_a_Window_-_1981.497_-_Museum_of_Fine_Arts.jpg'
    domain: 'Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons'

tags: ["personal", "philosophy", "distractions", "reflective essay"]
---

The other day I read an article in _The Atlantic_ about Virginia Woolf and modern day feminism – drawing from Woolf’s extended essay, _A Room of One’s Own_.  While placing Woolf’s version of feminine liberty in a modern context, the author notes a parallel between Woolf’s anecdote of a woman interrupted in her thoughts by a man, and Toni Morrison’s argument that racism is most insidious in that it distracts from serious thinking.  And I agree wholeheartedly with her that the need to justify one’s existence on the basis of sex and race is not only alienating, but also destructive.  But what she leaves open is the question of time, and whether we still have enough of it to think in the first place.  Certainly, gender and racial equality has seen dramatic progression in the last century.  But free from these distractions, are we truly free from distractions posed by more trivial things, things that are seemingly innocuous, normalized, so integrated into our lives and senses that we pay them no mind?  What are these trivialities, you might ask, and I should acknowledge that I have no one answer for it.  Put into the perspective of our lives, however, it is an incessant need to move forward, a near-universal drive exemplified by our metropolises and our cities.  The author of the article describes herself rolling her eyes at Virginia Woolf’s written need for absolute solitude and concentration.  As the modern woman, she cannot but admire a different kind of feminine productivity – one that juggles work, family, and marriage.  We all decry distractions.  We all bemoan burdens.  But we cannot but give praise to the work that has been produced on the edges, in the gaps, in between commuting from home to work, between childcare and career ambitions.
There is no time to slow down.

Today’s ideal writer is about as distant from the ideal a century ago as we used to find the moon.  Before the modern writer was famous, she was juggling two jobs and three babies.  Before that, she was busy doing a university degree, or enduring (and enjoying, for joy and growth are always necessary) a scrappy upbringing on a farm.  And after she “makes it”, she is busy frequenting press releases, publicity gatherings, book signings.  In her free time she is posting pithy quotes on Instagram.  If only we could all be like Elena Ferrante.  But I digress.

If we but cast our gaze to a century ago, a very different portrait greets our eyes.  The writer then was idle, well-off, and solidly upper class.  They wore suits and ties, sported foppish hats and gazed languidly to the side, in intentional or unintentional emulation of the aristocracy they either derided or adulated.  Looking at French writers like Proust, Colette, and yes, even the British, including Virginia Woolf, there is little sense of being in a hurry, and a more acute rendition of the flow of life, in which a thousand things are continuously present while simultaneously in flux.  There are symbols – and of these Forster was particularly fond – but to their writers they are more than tokens of eternity.  They _are_ eternity, for every moment, no matter how different from the one that came before, is recorded in that writer’s ever-active mind, who moves between sun-lit parks, salons, and hotels, and immerses himself in art and music that do not necessarily cause him revelations and epiphanies, but which he admires, as in Walter Pater's famous philosophy about art, for its own sake.

Of course, things were different on the other side of the Atlantic, even then.  In the early 1900s, the Americans already had a much faster pace of life, idolizing a different upbringing, championing a different set of values.  Novels by Steinbeck, Faulkner, and Mark Twain were hardly produced in the leisure of a bourgeois drawing room.  If anything, the Americans were contemptuous toward the drawing room, which is fundamentally European.  And even Fitzgerald, that master and decadent of the Jazz Age, could not refrain from the endless tone of melancholy between his lighted windows and glasses of yellow champagne.  There was no sitting still in America.  And amid the wars, the technological advances (Woolf’s aeroplane and Proust’s telephone), and the palpable sense of change (a new ‘classless’ England in _Howard’s End_), the whole of Europe was heading in the same direction.

At this point, however, I should probably make a distinction between “change” and “being a busy person”.  The ages have been continuously changing even before our ancestors learned to walk on their two legs and contemplate something other than their next meal.  Some periods of history no doubt feel static – the Middle Ages immediately comes to mind – but even then there was hardly ever a state of perfect stasis.  Little battles and large wars continually shape our world, and more recently, technology has played much of the same part.  But simply because the world is changing does not imply a lifestyle as frantic and fast-paced as what is common now.  Certainly, novelists like Proust and Woolf witnessed (and wrote about) terrific changes, the tidal waves altering humanity itself, and they expressed great feeling toward them – and yet, the environment within which their intellect actively dissected the world was very different from the world itself.  Possibly we shall say now that they lived in greenhouses or ivory towers – tolerably wealthy and obscenely idle.  Their ideas were the fruit of leisure and privilege.  And so this atmosphere of perfect leisure must be taken into account when truly understanding the “room of one’s own” that Woolf proclaims to be the foundation of feminine creativity.  The door with a lock is not only a barrier to physical intrusion – it is also a deterrent of mental distractions.

The little things and the big things.  Ironically, it is the big things that we are more inclined to address and change, and change we have succeeded in accomplishing, to a lesser or greater degree.  Misogyny, racism, classicism…  All these have been publicly decried in one form or another, and we have made great strides in addressing them.  Of course, they are yet to be eliminated, but within the “correct” ideology in which we innovate ideas today, they are of paramount importance and unquestionable status.  To voice the old prejudices is to commit social suicide, as it should be.  But the small things are hardly so sweepingly, so universally addressed.  If anything, the writers of today are forced to engage more than ever with trivialities, and by that I’m referring to the internet, to the social media, to a new culture that favors engagement and sensationalism over introspection and contemplation.  On one level, this is a manifestation of egalitarianism.  We have an appreciation for the popular audience, for the individual reader, and for the writer who squeezed out a novel while working odd jobs to support her family.  On our college and job applications today, engaging with the audience and juggling work with loftier aspirations are probably some of the most valuable qualifications, the best recommendations of a superior character.  But what people seem scarcely to consider is that there are other forms of creativity, other forms of intellect – ones that thrive in solitude and grow under the nurture of time.

And it is this kind of intellect, for all the egalitarianism of our age, that is still exclusively the playing field of the well-to-do.  By paying their way through elite institutions and eventually into the elite academic circles, the wealthy may still obtain solitary intellectualism.  But for the average person, the person who relies on his own talents and the goodwill of others, this is a necessarily bleak endeavor.  After all, it is cooperation and productivity that we reward, not individual ventures of the mind that traverse largely lonely fields on its own, with few peers and fewer patrons.

Is wealth a necessary prerequisite for solitude?  I think it may very well be.  Consider, for a moment, the avenues toward a better life available to a person from the lower and middle classes.  If he lacks the means to further his own education and career, then he must rely on the generosity of others.  These “others” encompass charities, governments, and higher education institutions, but they can hardly open their funding pools to each and every applicant.  Thus, the criteria for "worthiness" were born.  The exemplary character of a modern young person was defined.  Those who met the standards were admitted and given access to resources and perhaps a glimpse of the doorway to intellectual fulfillment as well as conventional success; those who did not were sent on their way.  All this is not really shocking.  What is surprising and perhaps absurd is the stunning similarities between criteria defined by a wide variety of these charitably inclined institutions.  Several decades ago, that criteria was based on academics and grades.  Now, it is based on a seemingly universally acknowledged image of a kind, high-achieving young person.  And indeed he is very wonderful, disciplined, helpful, and well-rounded.  But if he had had a different character, a different set of values, and a different doctrine during his upbringing, if he had not been so community-inclined, not so adept at leadership, not so happy to push himself in the ideal direction as it is defined today – he might have had a very different experience of life.

It is in dissonance that depression is born.  The dissonance between thoughts and actions, between personal ideals and universal ones, between the end, the middle, and the beginning.  When the world does not agree with the individual, that dissonance may just feel bleakest.  In this struggle distractions are endless, for nothing, unless born of the heart and true to the soul, can be a fixed, focused endeavor.

All else are distractions.  And I think, despite what the world might think, despite its sincerity, its hypocrisy, its aspirations toward good or a misguided evil, its charity directed rightly or wrongly, it is the distractions that will beat us down.  And when we choose the road less taken, or when we choose the road of solitude, it is our own dreams that we must bear, not the dreams of the world.  For the world can have too many dreams, but we ourselves can never have too many.