---
layout: ../../../layouts/MarkdownPostLayout.astro
title: 'Why I Write'
pubDate: '2025-09-30'
description: 'What Venus and Frankenstein have to do with us; idolatry and contempt, and an echo chamber of Want that I attempt to escape through writing.'
author: 'Florence Yuan'

tags: ["personal", "philosophy", "writing", "reflective essay"]
---

These days, we live in the twin towers of vanity and envy.  The first pushes us to admire ourselves in the glass, the second to surreptitiously catch the reflections of others in that glass.  Both create the intellectual equivalent of an echo chamber.  When the echo becomes so loud and resounding that it is unable to be ignored, we cover our ears through laughter and mockery, through the endless reaffirmation of our satisfaction with our own looks and our contempt toward others.  But really we walk on nails with a hollow soul.  We are unable to articulate the beauty of the sunset or the repulsiveness of the politician.  We cannot say why trees move us without cringing.  And therein lies, I think, the modern impulse to get rid of embarrassment.  We’re embarrassed at everyone and everything, yet at things we should rightly be embarrassed we’re as blind as mole-rats.  A man who cringes at an artist does not cringe at his own inane parody of that artist, and he blithely shares it online.  Also, he does not write and he does not make art.

When I write I always have to confront a terrible envy.  It’s an envy of a white Venus that has no flaws, and therefore nothing for a slack-jawed audience to contract embarrassment from.  She is as pristine as the foam from which she was born, as immaculate and irreproachable as the Love for which she stands.  Note that it’s a purely capital-case Love.  She rarely handles the lower-case love, for that’s where the divine concept ends and man’s messy folly begins.  When she does she dooms the gods and mortals alike.
And now I am doomed with a love for writing.  Looking at the image of Venus does not help me.  I am aware of my ugliness, my envy, my unrefined mind and plodding intellect.  Plodding and slow and afraid, as though I’m perpetually terrified of suddenly being asked to undress and appear as a statue, and the connoisseurs and arbiters of this world will dissect me most mercilessly, as though I were Frankenstein’s monster.  This flesh barrier – the need to convince myself that I’m truly in touch with this earth, this flesh, this devil – haunts me always.  And so I take out the imaginary stitches Frankenstein put in within me, I argue most vehemently that I am not simply a limp baggage of flesh that a jolt of electricity sends jerking and flailing, impotent and monstrous.

I should like to be a scientist, if only I can deny my own need for electrocution.  It is proven – electricity runs through our brain.  The more barbarous among us used to attempt to increase that voltage, to stimulate healthy minds and cure diseased ones.  Had we all been Frankenstein’s monsters that experiment might have succeeded.  Alas, we’re the children of Venus, born to unite under a sensual philosophy as erratic and illogical as her temper.

What we do not share is her perfection, immortalized under the sensuous brushstroke of Botticelli.  But Botticelli was disingenuous if he truly believed his painting was only of the symbol, the idea.  Aesthetics is a physical thing.  The brain refuses to work further than that.  The portrait gives a pleasure that ironically, virtually all the great writers have succumbed to.  The mind and the body, when Neoplatonism would like us to work from mind to divinity.  Why was Dorian Gray so terrified of losing his youth and his good looks?  There was nothing divine in his fear of aging.  His body recoiled from the loss of a universally adulated perfection – the white Venus, and his mind responded by indulging in more debauchery.  In our vanity and envy we are stupid creatures, more primal than intellectual.  Writers as a race have long moved past the cross, the balance, and the obligatory oil painting of the Last Judgment.

It is the skull that we still keep from vanitas paintings.  Hamlet holding a skull, always thinking about death.  Death, death, the end of perfection and imperfection alike.  Some will say that love has to do with death also – the fatal satellites that encircle each other, drawing ever closer.  So why do we write?  Why do I write?

I write so that I do not die a premature death.  I write so that I am perfectly aware that even the white Venus shall sometime succumb to death, if not of her own volition than by mine, for I shall with certainty die before her, and then even she shall hold no meaning.  I write so I do not laugh at the earnestness of artists who talk of death as though it might happen tomorrow – and this is no empty pathos.  And if that is true, then what time have we to laugh at imperfections?  Our brain does not run on electricity, and like Frankenstein’s monster, we are born to be corrupted by the image of Venus.
So it is the anti-Venus that I attempt to find through writing.  An urge to embrace what our body rejects.  I have often found myself regressing, reaching again for the remedy of the perpetually ironical gaze – but it is no panacea.  And really, I have written enough about ugliness, when even the anti-Venus can be perfectly beautiful.